ADDITIONAL_NOTES.txt
<seligman@nevis.columbia.edu>
26-Sep-2012

This is a detailed supplement to the brief notes in README.txt. These
notes explain why things are done in a certain way in
AnalysisExample_module.cc (if you followed directions, you've renamed
it by now). Believe it or not, it's to teach you something useful.

 (1) See
     <https://cdcvs.fnal.gov/redmine/projects/larsoftsvn/wiki/Using_the_Framework>
     for a description of the ART classes used in the.cc file. The
     description of the artmod command is particularly interesting if
     you're generating a module from scratch. Of course, since you're
     starting from this code and editing it to do what you want, you
     probably won't use the artmod command for this first analysis
     project.

 (2) Keep focused: You want to read in LArSoft events and create
     histograms and n-tuples. Don't get bogged down in the detailed
     code in the .cc file. You might be better off renaming or moving
     that file and creating a new one from scratch or using artmod,
     referring to the original as needed.

 (3) Why the "_module" part of the name? So you'll remember to use the
     DEFINE_ART_MODULE macro in the file; it's near the end. This lets
     you use the name of this class in a "module_type" statement in a
     .fcl file; there's an example in the sample .fcl file in this
     directory.
     Also, that will help the system to compile it in its own library
     and not to mix with other things and modules from the same
     source directory.

 (4) If you're familiar with C++, then the "_module.cc" file takes the
     place of a 'main' routine in LArSoft. If you create any external
     classes to be called by your module that are part of the same
     package, you'll put the headers in a .h file and the
     implementation in a .cxx file.

 (5) Don't confuse the name "AnalysisExample" (in larexamples repository)
     with the contents of the package "AnalysisBase" (in lardata
     repository). The AnalysisBase package contains classes
     that define the final physics objects produced by the
     reconstruction process (particle ID, shower energy, etc.). The
     AnalysisExample package provides an example of how to analyze
     "stuff" that's been put in LArSoft event records.

 (6) Once you have a ROOT file of histograms and n-tuples, what can
     you do with it? There's a ROOT tutorial at
     <http://www.nevis.columbia.edu/~seligman/root-class/> that will
     teach you how to analyze n-tuples.

 (7) I put in a couple of examples of how to use associations near the
     end of the code:
     <https://cdcvs.fnal.gov/redmine/projects/larsoftsvn/wiki/Use_Associations>.

     These examples are intended to be sketches, not the full-blown
     n-tuple creation examples earlier in the code. It should be
     enough to get you started as you follow the LArSoft
     reconstruction chain, either forwards or backwards.

 (8) The code in the .cc file fetches simb::MCParticle and sim::SimChannel
     objects directly. Since that code was written, a service was created
     that reads those objects for you, along with simb::MCTruth
     objects. This service is cheat::BackTracker.

     To use this service, get a handle to cheat::BackTracker in the
     same way you get a handle to art::TFileService in the .cc file,
     then use that handle to invoke any of the methods in
     ${LARSIM_INC}/MCCheater/BackTracker.h.

     So why not use that service in AnalysisExample? Because for the
     work you'll be doing, you'll probably won't be just reading in
     the simulated particles and channels; you'll probably be creating
     n-tuples and histograms based on other LArSoft objects. You'll
     still use the same methods to read in those objects that are
     shown in the .cc file: create an art::Handle to a std::vector,
     then use art::Event::GetByLabel to fill the vector.
     Also, importing data products via services will make expert mutter
     about good practises. The rule is that if your module uses
     a data product, it should fetch it by itself. BackTracker is
     still appreciated for its ability to recover connections
     between reconstructed and generated particles.

     Sound a bit complicated? It can be. That's why there are examples
     in the code, plus comments in the .fcl file to help you
     understand how the code connects to job control file.

     Keep BackTracker in mind; it's a handy tool. But learn I/O from
     this example and from the wiki page at
     <https://cdcvs.fnal.gov/redmine/projects/larsoftsvn/wiki/Using_the_Framework>.

 (9) If you want to do dE/dx studies using this code as a starting
     point, then you're going to need to put the following line at the
     end of the .fcl script (e.g., prodsingle.fcl) you use to generate
     events:

     services.user.LArG4Parameters.KeepEMShowerDaughters: true

     Why? In LArG4, by default, if a particle is a typical product of
     e-m processes (bremmstrahlung, pair production, etc.) the
     particle ID stored in the channels and hits is that of the "eve"
     particle; that is, the ultimate mother particle that interacted
     in an "interesting" way before converting into an e-m
     shower. That's a reasonable thing to do if you're working on
     reconstructing showers.

     But for dE/dx studies, it becomes confusing; the particle you're
     tracking seems to have energy losses throughout the volume of the
     detector. You want to distinguish the particle of interest from
     any of its daughter particles. Setting the above flag will store
     the original Geant4 track ID for each daughter's energy deposits,
     so you can easily exclude them as shown in the code.

(10) So what's all this stuff about vectors, maps, range-based for
     loops, and iterators?

     They're part of an important extension to C++ called STL, the
     Standard Template Library. (Bonus geek credits if you first read
     "STL" as "slower than light.") Vectors and maps are used
     extensively in LArSoft; occasionally other STL containers are
     used as well.

     When you first come into contact with STL classes, there's a
     tendency to treat them like FORTRAN arrays (if you learned
     programming before 1995) or like Python dictionaries (if you
     learned programming after 2005). If you use the same techniques
     to handle vectors and maps as you did in those other languages,
     you'll get slow, inefficient code that may waste large amounts of
     memory.

     Obviously, you can't learn all about STL in a single code
     example. What I've tried to do is demonstrate some basics: use
     iterators to step through STL containers (vectors, maps, lists,
     etc.); don't copy an entire object when you can copy a pointer or
     an address; use "auto" to save on typing; use "const" to protect
     your data; take advantage of STL's built-in algorithms when you
     can (like fast binary searches on sorted containers).

     To make things a bit more complicated, in Sep-2012 we started
     using a C++ compiler that enabled the additional language
     features in C++11. The code examples attempt to illustrate what
     you can now do with these new features, including the "auto"
     keyword and range-based for loops.

     When you start asking, "Why does this method return an entire map
     instead of some kind of pointer to the map? Are they at least
     considering move semantics?" then you know you've mastered STL,
     memory management, and the new extensions to C++.
